[TAKU]
When I was a boy,
I was always curious
about the people
who roamed in the valley mist.
[TAKU]
Every year,
they would appear before
the May showers began,
and then disappear soon after,
when the storms ended.
[TAKU]
Hm?
[FUMI]
Young master!
I thought I'd find you here.
The master is calling for you.
That beautiful purple
mist has returned.
What are you talking about?
Looks like plain,
ordinary mist to me.
You are such an odd child.
[TAKU'S FATHER]
Ah, that's right.
It's already time
for the mist people
to come through here, isn't it?
Guess I should get the
storm shutters fixed.
Father, those people.
Don't you worry about
what they're up to?
No.
They've been coming
here for a long time
and they've never once
caused any trouble.
They simply guard the mountain
and talk amongst themselves.
All right, but what exactly
is it that they do?
Well, to be honest, I'm not
sure what they do for a living.
I've never been deeply
involved with them.
They've never asked
for much of anything,
and they keep to themselves.
I've heard that they know
a lot about foreign lands,
and that they're a friendly and
amusing group of
people to talk to.
But beyond that,
they're a mystery.
What about our water?
They might take some
from the waterfall.
Why should we deny some thirsty
travelers a drink of water?
It's not like they'd
try to reroute it
to their fields
like the villagers.
I don't like outsiders coming
and going through
here as they please.
Taku. The heir to this
family shouldn't be saying
such stingy and selfish things.
Just think of
them as the birds
that migrate through
the changing seasons.
Let them be.
They'll be gone soon enough.
[rustling]
[TAKU]
Hm?
Hey! Catch anything?
The fish can see
you from there.
[grunts] What are you
think you're doing?
Don't take so many fish!
Do you hear me?
This is my mountain!
Your mountain?
So you're the "Master" here?
I'm the son of the owner.
[ISAZA]
Really?
[footsteps]
[gasps]
A "Master's" son.
[ISAZA] Guess I should
give these back then,
or, at least I should.
but we want something to eat.
Could you spare one
fish per person?
I guess that would be okay.
Thanks a lot.
I'll give the rest
to the "Master".
I'm Isaza of the Watari.
I'll be staying around this
mountain for a little while.
Pleased to meet you.
[ISAZA]
You sure are a strange one.
A "Master" who's bad at fishing.
[FUMI] My goodness!
You caught so many today!
How would you like
me to cook them?
[TAKU] What's with him?
There's nothing that says,
"A Master's son must
be good at fishing."
[TAKU grunts]
[gasps] Where did these
stupid things come from?
[ISAZA laughs]
I gotcha! You big liar.
My Grandfather told
me that the real
"Master" of this
mountain is elsewhere.
I'm not a liar!
My family bought this land
a little at a time
for generations!
They "bought" it?
And that makes you think you're
the "Master" of this place?
This land isn't something
that can be bought
and sold like that.
I know. It's not like that.
This is a special
mountain, isn't it?
My family knows that.
The land that surrounds
us is fertile
because of this mountain,
so my family has been
protecting it all this time.
My father is the one
preventing everyone
from damming the waterfall
and routing it to
the villager's fields.
So tell me, did a mushi
master tell you to do that?
[gasps] Yeah! I think
that's what he was called.
He told my ancestors
to protect this place.
He said that if we didn't,
the mountain would get sick.
[ISAZA]
I see.
So this place is
important to you, too.
And your family protects it.
I guess that's okay then.
I was going to tell you
to return those fish
from yesterday.
Sorry about that.
[grunts]
[ISAZA]
See you later.
[TAKU]
Wait.
I'll return those fish
if you gave them to me
out of a misunderstanding.
I've no need to be
indebted to you.
Any luck?
Just a little bit longer.
Come on, I've already
caught enough for everyone.
I said just a little longer!
[TAKU] You mentioned a
different "Master" earlier.
Who is that?
The big catfish that lives
in the waterfall basin.
[TAKU] The what?
Who decided that?
[ISAZA]
The mountain.
Those who are to
become "Masters"
are born with moss
growing on their body.
That's how you can spot them.
[gasps]
Then I've seen him before!
A catfish with moss on its head!
Really? I'm jealous.
Hey, tell me something.
Have you ever seen
a purple mist,
swelling and twisting
around like it was alive?
Of course I have.
This area is a Koumyaku.
Huh?
It's the source of life that
flows through this land.
[ISAZA]
It mixes with the water,
evaporates, and then
becomes precipitation.
That's why the mist here
has a life of its own.
[ISAZA] That's also
why it changes color.
You can tell what the
condition of the land is
from day to day by watching
the hue of the mist.
[TAKU]
Huh...
[gasps]
[ISAZA] Quick!
Be careful! Don't panic!
[TAKU]
Shut up!
[TAKU] It's still
not enough, but here.
See ya'.
[ISAZA] You know; I've told
you about a lot of things.
Next time, you should
tell me something.
Like what?
I don't know about
anything special, like you.
[ISAZA]
It can be about anything.
You know, stories.
Things that happen
in the village.
[MEN chatter, laugh]
[UNCLE] Well! If it isn't
young Master Taku.
What's the occasion? You usually
don't come out to join us.
I was just hoping
that I might be able to listen
to some interesting stories.
Then you're just in time!
I was about to tell the Master
some things that happened
to me while I was traveling.
Please. Have a seat.
[ISAZA chuckles]
Are you serious? Is that true?
[TAKU laughs]
Who knows?
My Uncle tends to exaggerate
when he's telling a story.
[TAKU] Oh! He also said
he saw a strange kid
in a village two
mountains south of here.
He was about ten years old.
He had white hair,
and green eyes.
He was actually
missing one of them.
Yeah? I wonder why?
Was he a foreigner?
He didn't know, but it
didn't seem like he was.
Huh. Two mountains
to the south, huh?
That's the same direction we'll
be headed when we leave.
Maybe I'll meet him.
[gasps] That's right. The rains
are almost over for this season.
When will you be leaving?
I don't know.
My Grandfather looks at the mist
every morning and decides.
How does that help?
[ISAZA]
If the mist has a blue tint,
the mountain's energy
moves silently and swiftly.
If it's reddish,
it's the opposite.
When it's golden, the mountain
is in the best mood.
That's the best day to leave.
Huh. Sounds like an easy
way to make decisions.
[ISAZA]
Are you jealous?
[TAKU] My future has
already been decided for me.
I'm going to live here
and look after this mountain,
just like my father.
So yeah. I'm jealous.
[ISAZA]
Hm. I see.
[WATARI] Take a look at this.
It's a detailed map
of the Koumyaku's path
through the mountain.
[MUSHI-SHI 1] I see. Then I'll
take the map, as well.
[WATARI]
Very good.
[MUSHI-SHI 1]
And Isaza.
Thanks for that
information the other day.
It helped me quite a bit.
Keep me posted.
[ISAZA]
Sure.
That's how we make our living.
We sell information
about the mushi
and changes in the Koumyaku's
line to the mushi Masters.
We can't support ourselves
just by watching over
the light vein alone.
It helps out everyone.
You should have told
me that to being with.
I would have tried to find some
more strange stories for you.
No. That wouldn't help.
If I didn't know
what was normal,
then I wouldn't know when
something strange was going on.
And besides, I like hearing
about the village.
[scoffs]
Whatever.
Wait. What do
you mean, "Whatever"?
I mean I understand
everything now.
[ISAZA]
What are you mad about?
Shut up! Just leave me alone.
That's just how I do things.
I won't apologize for anything.
I didn't ask you to apologize.
[FUMI grunts]
I hate this weather!
[FUMI] The monsoon
season's almost over.
Maybe this will be the last one.
[footsteps]
[grunts]
[TAKU]
It's so hot.
[cicadas shirp]
[TAKU]
Isaza?
It's golden.
[TAKU]
Then, the following year.
At the same time
as always, they returned.
But the people that
made up their group
were a little different
from the year before.
[ISAZA]
Yeah. We picked him up.
That story you told me
turned out to be true.
We found him wandering
around the village.
He didn't have
anywhere to go, so...
He may look strange,
but he's very nice.
His name's Ginko.
[TAKU]
Hm.
[ISAZA] But I don't think he'll
be with us for very long.
He has a condition
that attracts mushi.
If he stays near the
light vein for too long,
then either he or the vein
itself will be affected.
He'll probably be
placed under the care
of a mushi Master
in the near future.
[TAKU]
Fumi! What's wrong?
Young Master!
It's your father!
He's... The Master has...
[TAKU'S MOTHER]
Like I said,
the will states that the entire
mountain is to be given to Taku.
[MALE RELATIVE 1]
I know, I know,
but do you really think
he'll be able to handle this
all by himself?
The village is still growing,
and there's not enough water.
We need to re-route
it from the basin.
[MALE RELATIVE 2] Please,
let us take care of things.
We won't let you down.
[footsteps]
[ISAZA]
Taku.
Hey... Taku.
I heard from the
mountain guards.
I'm sorry... about your father.
You haven't come to the
mountain for quite some time.
Are you all right?
[TAKU]
I... I tried, but...
...I couldn't
protect the mountain.
It was taken away
by my relatives.
They're going to
dam the waterfall,
and the land will be devastated.
I'm sorry.
[ISAZA]
Taku. Please...
Listen to me.
There's something wrong with
the mountain. It's restless.
The ground is hot,
and there's a strange scent.
The animals are leaving, and the
Koumyaku has started to shift.
We're going to leave
and follow it.
Take care of yourself.
Wait. So you're not coming back?
I don't know.
[TAKU]
Please. Let me go.
I wanna join you.
I don't... I don't
wanna stay here.
Please, take me with you.
Like they you took that
Ginko kid with you before.
I can see the colors
of the mist, too!
And it's not like I
have to be related
to any of you to join, right?
[ISAZA]
None of us are related by blood.
The old man I call Grandfather
decides who comes with us.
[ISAZA]
I'll ask him.
Come to the waterfall
tomorrow morning.
[gasps]
[TAKU]
The mist is pure white.
Something's wrong. Very wrong.
This has never
happened before.
Where's Isaza?
He already left.
[gasps]
You're lying! He wouldn't!
[GINKO]
The Koumyaku started shifting
in the middle of the night.
It couldn't be helped.
Isaza left you a message.
He said, "I'm sorry".
[gasps]
[GINKO] They have to
follow the light vein.
[GINKO] The Watari are
people who were kicked out
of their villages
because of the mushi.
If that is your path as well,
then someday, you'll meet again.
They were kicked out, huh?
You mean like you were?
[MUSHI-SHI 2]
Hey, Ginko.
We're leaving.
[GINKO] I've already
been kicked out again.
Oh.
He had one more thing
he wanted to tell you.
He said that the rest of you
should get away from
this mountain, as well.
[TAKU]
After that day,
the mountain's mist never
showed any sign of color.
[TAKU]
Then, six months later...
The mountain spewed fire.
Those with family
in other places
abandoned the
village to join them.
[TAKU]
The mountain burned.
The waterfall was buried,
but the basin still
remained as a pond.
[TAKU]
Once, I saw the shadow
of the large catfish
in its waters.
But from what I could see,
the crown of moss it once
had was no longer there.
[TAKU]
About ten years later,
we cleared the ash
and planted trees.
Slowly, the mountain
began to recover.
But it was never as fertile
as it had been before.
[TAKU] Many of the
children born in the village
or on the mountain
were weak and frail.
[TAKU] Isaza and the others knew
that something was coming.
[TAKU] It probably had something
to do with the light vein.
Either way, what can
I do to help them?
I don't even know
how to find them.
[TAKU] Even now, the sound
of footsteps in the grass
makes me twitch and take notice.
Always hoping that I'll look
to see that they've returned.
[TAKU'S WIFE pants]
Taku!
Taku! There's wonderful news!
There's a man at
the lower house
who says he can cure
our children's illness!
[GINKO]
Now remember,
prepare the medicine
just like I showed you.
Give it to them once a day
until the illness has passed.
[gasps]
I don't believe it!
[TAKU] This mountain used
to be part of the Koumyaku,
but the light vein shifted
and abandoned this land.
Many mushi left along with it.
The ones that remained behind
seem to gather near
the people here.
Is that the reason all
of our children are ill?
Hey. You seem to know
a lot about this stuff.
Yes, you're exactly right.
You were born healthy and strong
because of the light vein.
It was different
for your children.
The medicine I gave
them not only has vitamins
and nourishment, but it will
also help keep away the mushi.
I see.
Aw, hey, you know what?
I don't think you remember,
but you and I met once before,
a long time ago.
We have? When was it?
I don't remember you.
Do you remember
someone named Isaza?
I do. why are you a friend
of his or something?
I still keep in touch with him.
He's actually the one that
told me about this place.
He said you'd probably need
something about now. Medicine.
He's doing the same as usual.
[TAKU] If that's so,
then it's all right.
[TAKU]
Everything's fine as it is.
[GINKO]
Hm?
A large catfish.
And the shape of this pond.
I think I've been here before.
[GINKO]
Ah... It's him.
He and the mountain have changed
quite a bit, haven't they?
[GINKO]
Wouldn't you agree?
Mr. Former Master?
[NARRATOR] This world is
full of life unknown to man.